hi I'm Ben and this is the house I built
out of shipping containers now I've been
interested in shipping container
architecture for quite some time but I
had a really hard time finding good
information about how to get building
permits or how much would it cost well
we did the research we documented
everything that we did and now we're so
excited to share with you what we
learned so check it out this is episode
2 where we'll show you how we move the
containers cut them open and started the
structural reinforcement after letting
the concrete cure for three days we
began stripping the molds and getting
ready for the day I was most excited
about which is crane day this is the
single biggest piece of equipment that
we rented for this project and it's
basically like a giant transformer to
pick up the containers they use these
fabric straps which are super strong and
each one of them has a hook which can
hook into the boxes at the corner of the
containers we started by moving one the
extra 20-foot containers that I bought
to store tools and materials on site
this is a specialty type of container
that opens up not just on the short
sides but on the broad side as well
next we started moving the other 20-foot
container which is going to be the guest
bedroom and bathroom this container is
lightweight enough that the crane could
actually drive while the box was
suspended in the air
we had to line up the container so that
it wouldn't break one of the drain pipes
that was sticking through the concrete
next up was a 40-foot container which is
too heavy to drive with so what they did
is he just would pick it up swing the
arm around to get it closer and then
reposition the crane and do the whole
thing again
we put some blue painters tape on the
corners of the concrete foundation just
to give us a mark to aim for the second
40-foot container had too far this
distance to travel and it's sort of like
watching an inchworm sort of move its
way across the desert
it took a few attempts and three guys
pushing on the corners to get it in the
right location now if I was designing
this again I would now know that it's
possible to get it not exactly where you
want it but within about half an inch
crane day was a lot of fun but now it's
time to turn these steel boxes into a
house we started pulling up the floors
on the containers now these floors are
made out of plywood that is about one in
the eighth of an inch thick
the steel structure underneath and
underside of this plywood is coated with
a thick black tar-like substance which
is there for waterproofing and they keep
the steel from rusting the majority of
the plumbing for this house is going to
go in this layer right amongst all the
steel beams
and of course things never line up
properly so we're gonna have to cut out
a few of them now the pipe that Robert
the plumber is working around is going
to be the main drain that goes out from
the container to the septic tank
[Music]
originally we had left us a lot longer
but once we saw that it wasn't going to
align perfectly with the structure
inside the container we had to cut it
down so it wouldn't break when we drop
the container into place
this meant that Robert would have to use
a jackhammer to expose a little bit of
the pipe by removing some of the
concrete so we'd have enough room to fit
an elbow on it now when I first learned
we'd have to do this I was worried it
would take a really long time but it
actually only took about 45 minutes we
then cut holes into other beams so that
we could run the smaller drain pipes
which will receive the water from the
bathroom sink the shower the toilet and
the kitchen sink the cut edges of the
steel are quite sharp
so the plumbers put some twenty minute
hot mud and spray foam in between the
pipes and the steel beams just to keep
the pipes from sliding around and
potentially getting damaged now wherever
you have drains you also need to have
venting pipes and these go all the way
up through the walls and out the roof
now the black ABS pipe is fine for
wastewater going out of the building but
for all the clean water coming in we
want to use copper this was more
time-consuming because the copper has to
be sweated with a torch whereas the ABS
plastic pipe can just be glued together
now in the floor areas that don't have
pipes going through them we started
filling those places in with rigid
insulation we packed in two layers of
2-inch thick rigid insulation and then
use spray foam to seal up all the gaps
even though this insulation has
excellent r-value it's not going to be
super effective in this location because
the conductivity of the metal is going
to create a thermal bridge around it but
still we added it in to keep that space
full keep critters out of it and to just
give us a little bit of extra thermal
protection this foam insulation cuts
pretty easily with a box cutter so we
just cut pieces that would also fit
around all the pipes after sealing it
all with spray foam and testing to make
sure the pipes are watertight we then
put the floorboards back on this
insulation is just so we can cover up
the floors and get to work on the frame
we'll show the full insulation details
including how we did continuous
insulation over this plywood in next
week's episode while the rest of the
crew was working on the insulation and
the floors I began making the structural
frames for the doors and windows after
double-checking the dimensions of the
windows I began making the 45-degree
cuts so that I can make a mitered frame
the shipping container gets its strength
from the continuous corrugated panels so
whenever you cut one of these panels you
have to reinforce it for these first few
windows I decided to use two inch tube
steel it works great and is plenty
strong but as you see for some of the
later frames I switched to angle
sections no I did all the welding for
the doors and windows using this little
Forney welder it's an inexpensive
machine that's easy to use great for
beginners and powerful enough to build a
house with and now for the moment of
truth I was ready to cut into the
container for the first time now it was
pretty nervous about this because you
know I paid a reasonable amount of money
for these things and we'd spent all this
time to get them in the right position
so I really didn't want to screw this up
I drew out the square that I'm gonna cut
out that will allow the frame to fit in
using a silver sharpie a level and a
piece of cardboard so I could draw
straight lines around the corrugation we
didn't have electricity from the grid
available on the construction site so I
set up one of my little goals zero Power
Packs with a solar panel and that was
enough to keep my batteries for my
battery-powered angle grinder nice and
charged now I've seen people cut
containers open using a plasma cutter
but I'm really accurate with the angle
grinder it's a much easier tool to use
and less expensive
I just went slow made sure that was
following along the lines I went through
quite a few discs but it only took about
an hour and a half to cut out this
entire window the paint on these
containers is really thick so I wire
brushed it away to expose the bare steel
in preparation for welding I needed a
way to hold the frame in place while I
welded the frame to the corrugated metal
so I built these sliding supports out of
two by fours that would allow me to
clamp the two by fours to the
corrugation and hold the frame nice and
flush to the corrugation
this is important because when you cut
into these big panels of corrugated
metal they can bow and flex quite a bit
with this technique it's pretty
important that the hole you cut into
corrugated metal is just the right size
because you don't want to be having to
bridge across with the welder to connect
the pieces you don't have to do
continuous seams all the way around I
just tried to get about two to three
inch welds about every six to eight
inches I screwed up an over cut on this
piece but I just filled it in with my
welder
you
the second one went a lot smoother I
took more time in making sure that my
initial drawing on the container was
perfect and I went a lot slower with the
cutting as well making sure to stay
right on the line it was about a hundred
and twenty degrees inside these steel
boxes and cutting open the window was a
great experience not only get to see the
view but you get this rush of cooler
just a hundred and five degree air
coming in
you
it's definitely worth it to go really
slow and get your initial cut out as
accurate as possible the welding for the
second one was a lot easier because I
wasn't bridging as big of a gap between
the frame and the corrugated steel on
the first window I ended up making seams
that were a little bit too long on the
second one I kind of got it right and
was sticking to seams that were just
about 2 to 3 inches long if he try to
weld seams that are too long and
continuous the heat buildup from all the
welding can start to deform and Bend the
corrugated metal
for the two big 10 foot long by folding
doors I wanted a frame that was a little
bit stronger so I went with 3 inch by 2
inch tube steel
I glued some blocks of wood to the
underside of a steel square and then I
used that to clamp my tube steel pieces
at nice right angles
I learned that grinding things once
they're installed is a little bit more
difficult especially if you have to get
up on a ladder so I made sure to grind
out all my wells as I welded them
now the frames for the doors don't need
a bottom piece but I didn't want to move
this without one because it might Bend
so I just welded in a temporary support
I also didn't cut the vertical pieces to
length until I had welded the whole
thing together this way I can make sure
that both sides were even working close
to the ground is great because you can
keep everything nice and flat but it did
make it so that we'd have to flip the
frames over in order to cut all the way
through from the other side with the
angle grinder
first frame is done time to make a
second one exactly the same
for these big doors we started cutting
out the openings from the inside since
it was easier to get up on a ladder with
the nice flat floor black sharpie lines
showed up real strong against the light
beige interiors so it was easier to cut
from the inside because I could see the
line really crisply even through all the
sweat and fog on the safety glasses no
matter what side you're in though it's
easier to cut the part of the
corrugation that's closest to you so I
did do some of it outside as well it's
also easier to cut real close and flush
to the support beam from the outside
because from the inside it's hard to get
the angle grinder at the right angle
because the floor gets in the way now
one thing to be careful for is that when
you're cutting the container the walls
are under some pressure and all of a
sudden every once in a while they will
jump or move and this can pinch the
angle grinder or snap off a blade these
big pieces of metal are bendy heavy and
have jagged edges so it's a little bit
tricky to handle them without cutting
yourself up
some containers have welded on steel
loops that are used to strap down cargo
I just cut these out as well the
corrugated metal was welded to this base
beam along the container I switched to a
heavier angle grinder and just ground
this all down I stripped away the paint
in preparation for welding and we lifted
this 10 foot by 7 foot frame into place
remembering the lesson from the windows
about bridging the gaps we cut a little
bit more on the conservative side and it
wasn't quite big enough so we just
ground the way until the frame fit in
perfectly
we started by tacking the frame to the
base beam at the bottom corner and then
slowly worked our way up making sure
everything was still level
the three inch wide tube steel was a lot
easier to weld to the corrugation than
the two inch steel because there was
just a lot more surface area to connect
the welds to and the radius of the tube
steel wasn't sloping away from the
corrugation as soon as I got the frame
packed in and secured to the container
I cut away the temporary support in
retrospect I should have welded this
about six inches higher than I did just
to give myself a little bit more room to
cut it off
so while I was welding in the first
frame the guys started cutting the
opening for the second one now you might
think that shipping containers are quite
strong and don't need any additional
structural support but that's not
actually the case if you're doing a
fully permitted code approved building
our structural engineer had to design an
interior support system out of to buy
lumber and plywood that would meet all
the structural requirements from the
permitting office this required
substantial headers over these large by
folding doors we were figuring this out
as we went along and we knew that the
doors and windows would be the trickiest
parts so we were made sure to frame
round those and get that all set
relative to the drawings before filling
in all the wall spaces around them once
you have the key structural elements in
place using a nail gun to add in two by
fours isn't too hard
on most of the projects that I have been
involved with the header is directly
over the door itself but in this case
the header has to be tied in to the
square steel tube that runs along the
upper length of the container and so
therefore we had to push the header up
and then frame out underneath it the
purpose of the header is to provide
support over large doors or windows
you don't want deflection down on to
these frames which neither cause them to
break or it could make them very
difficult to open the frame we was going
pretty quickly but nothing was really
tied into the container yet except for
the 2x4 that runs along the bottom of
the wall that was attached to the
plywood that is part of the container
floor
the stretches of walls that don't have
doors in windows or plumbing features
went a lot faster because we could panel
eyes and build the walls and sections
outside we could then drag these into
the container and then shoot nails down
through this bottom 2x4 or sill plate
and into the plywood deck below now I've
had a lot of people ask why any sort of
additional structure is needed I mean
aren't these steel boxes shouldn't they
be strong enough by themselves the
problem isn't that these boxes aren't
strong enough it's where they get their
strength and it's from these continuous
corrugated panels that strength is
compromised when we cut into them even
though we are reinforcing where we cut
but the more important problem is that
this steel is exposed to the outside and
it's only about 1/8 of an inch thick if
you're relying on exterior steel that's
relatively thin for the structural
support of the building if someone
doesn't maintain the paint and it starts
to rust out the whole building could
collapse you don't really want buildings
that can have structural failures just
due to
owner neglect the most annoying part of
the framing was attaching the walls to
the steel containers we nailed these
galvanized steel brackets to a 2x4 and
then nail this on top of the walls to
create a double top plate and then drive
self-tapping screws through the holes in
the brackets and into the square steel
tube that runs along the top of the
container now putting this many
self-tapping screws into steel is not
fun and this took a minute our walls are
taller than 8 feet and we're gonna have
to add plywood sheathing so we added an
additional pieces of 2x4 in between the
studs so we'd have a surface for nailing
on the plywood
the ceiling will be supported by two by
fours on joist hangers we didn't nail
into two by fours yet because we still
have to add insulation and sprinkler
systems and other things but we just cut
them and set them in place for now so to
recap we have a two by four at the
bottom vertical two by fours with
stiffeners
some additional pieces for attaching the
plywood and eventually drywall hangers
to support the two by force that will
support the ceiling a double top plate
with brackets attached to the container
another tricky structural requirement
was that we had to tie down some of the
shear walls to the foundation we have to
have a steel rod coming up from the
concrete now we can get in there one of
two ways we can either cast it in place
and use a coupling nut or we can drill a
hole and epoxy it in there but in either
case it has to come up through the
container through a top plate where this
galvanized steel bracket can be bolted
to it and then that bracket can be
attached to a four by six or four by
four post
so Tony wrestled with that but we didn't
want to lock the post in place until we
knew how the window installation would
go after cleaning all the welds with
wire brush and then sprayed a few coats
of rusty metal primer over the welds the
exposed steel that I brushed away on the
container and the frames themselves we
ran a heavy B decock around the inside
of the frame and then press the window
into place the nailing flange on the
window is going right up against the
inside of the frame and then we drove
self tapping screws through the flange
and into the steel frame now this
wouldn't be an ideal building detail in
anything but a dry climate like this
because you really have to rely on the
silicone caulk from the exterior between
the window unit and the steel frame to
be your rain protection with the window
in place Tony then felt comfortable
adding in the post
so here's how the whole
aiming for this end wall looks we have a
steel rod going into the foundation that
attaches to a bracket that connects to a
post which is tied into the rest of the
2x4 framing
I recommend drilling holes in using
anchoring epoxy to fix two steel rods
into the concrete it's way easier than
trying to cast them in perfectly now you
may have noticed that the part of the
floor that the steel rod went through
was steel and that's because this is
part of the container where forklifts
can come in to lift up the container
from the end you may notice that our
building details are different
throughout the project and that's
because we were learning as we went the
frames I made out a tube steel for the
first set of doors and windows work just
fine but I noticed that it was very
difficult to hold them perfectly in
place and it was a really unforgiving
detail where you had to cut the window
hole perfect so for the next set of
doors
he used angle steel to make the frames
this way I would have a flange that
could catch on the hole in the container
which would make it easier for clamping
getting it straight and it would give us
a little bit of a overlapping connection
where we could caulk it from both sides
I used an angle grinder to notch out the
ends of these pieces of angle steel
so it did fit together and have a nice
flat flange
these frames are going to reinforce the
openings for the swinging entry doors
[Applause]
welded the corners added a temporary
support piece and then flip the frame
over and welded from the other side the
20-foot container which is going to
house the guest bedroom has two swinging
doors that are parallel to each other
that's going to create opportunities for
cross ventilation my buddy Eric was
visiting so we had ourselves a dueling
angle grinder situation Eric is a really
talented metal worker and be sure to
check out his work I'll put a link to
his Instagram in the description box
below I feel like this is a much better
way to frame the doors and windows not
only does the flange catch nicely on the
corrugation it actually gives you a
really clean aesthetic from the outside
as well you also get two different areas
to weld the frame to the corrugated
metal on the outside you weld right
along the opening but on the inside
you're welding the edge of the flange to
the surface of the corrugated metal
it's also nice because it gives us to
seems to call one on the inside and one
on the outside
I'll show finish drawings of the
different window framing details next
week as I show how I finished trimming
out all the windows and doors and also
in the next episode of the modern home
project will show how we did the
insulation install the doors and windows
and start having a little bit of fun
along the way
be sure to check out the first episode
and don't forget to subscribe and turn
on notifications
you
oh yeah and our new website
check it out we'll still be adding more
information as we go but it's worth
taking a look now